Use the number pad keys to move. Don't move with the arrow keys unless you want to make the game unnecessarily hard.

& interact with colors
% interact with visuals

= change options (they're saved at lib/user)
CTRL +*~ creates a HTML screenshot
#B to trigger a trap on purpose
n repeats the last used command

i inventory
h hack meat off a corpse
e display current equipment
d drop stuff
O offer (when standing on an altar)
p pray
s search
k destroy unwanted item
w equip (weapon, armor, etc.)
t take off worn item
v throw

. press this and then a direction to run in that direction
, stand still (wait a turn)
g pick up item
R rest (to regenerate health, mana etc.)

T dig (requires shovel/pick/other digging tool)
o open a door
c close a door
j spike a door (requires iron spikes)
S toggle search mode
B bash door
D disarm trap

b browse a book to see which spells it has
G skill menu (need to use that if you wanna increase them; they don't increase on their own)
m cast a spell or use other skill-based ability
N see special abilities (can buy new ones if your skills are good enough)
U activate a special power

E eat
F fill lamp (lanterns can be filled with oil, torches can be "filled" with more torches)
q quaff a potion
r read a scroll
{ inscribe an item
} remove inscription from item

A activate item (for certain artifacts or other activatable items)
a zap a wand
z zap a rod
u zap a staff

f fire ranged weapon ("wield" appropriate ammo in your quiver if possible)
* target cursor that lets you inspect what's on nearby tiles; use movement commands while in this mode to switch between targets

+ press this and then a direction to attack in that direction, for e.g. forcibly attacking a peaceful monster

M smaller map of the current level
x engrave
I inspect your items
L allows you to view the various sectors of the current level by using movement commands

H interact with a fountain (filling is much safer than quaffing, similar to NetHack)

P Pet Commands (can dismiss your pets or change their AI etc.)

Y chat to monsters
y give item to monster
Z try to steal item from monster

Ctrl-F see the level feeling, and possibly the active quest
Ctrl-P message log
: write notes

C character menu
~ display the knowledge menu where you can see e.g. which items or monsters you've found
Ctrl-Q quest log
[ sichtbare Monster anzeigen

Ctrl-X save and quit
Ctrl-S save
Q commit suicide (this ends your game!)

? help menu
/ see what a certain symbol means